Page 1 / 8 5.9.0 6 2022
Revised 03 / 2024

5.9.0 6 SPECIFIC GRAVITY AND ABSORPTION OF AGGREGATES (Kansas Test Method KT- 06 )

1. SCOPE

This method of test covers the procedures for determining the specific gravity and absorption of aggregates.
Coarse aggregate (Procedure I) represents aggregate retained on the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. Fine aggregate
(Procedure II) is all aggregate passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) and retained on the No.100 (150 μm) sieve.
KT- 06 reflects testing procedures found in AASHTO T 84 and T 85.

2. REFERENCED DOCUMENTS

2.1. Part V, 5.9; Sampling and Test Methods Foreword

2.2 KT- 0 1; Sampling and Splitting of Aggregates

2.3. KT-11; Moisture Tests

2.4. KT-24; Determination of Free Moisture or Absorption of Aggregate for Use in Concrete

2.5. ASTM E11; Woven Wire Test Sieve Cloth and Test Sieves

2.6. AASHTO T 84; Specific Gravity and Absorption of Fine Aggregate

2.7. AASHTO T 85; Specific Gravity and Absorption of Coarse Aggregate

2.8. ASTM C128; Method for Density, Relative Density (Specific Gravity), and Absorption of Fine
Aggregate

2.9. ASTM C670; Practice for Preparing Precision and Bias Statements for Test Methods for Construction
Materials

3. PROCEDURE I: COARSE AGGREGATE

3.1. Apparatus

3.1.1. The balance shall conform to the requirements of Part V, 5.9; Sampling and Test Methods
Foreword, Class G5. The balance shall be equipped with suitable apparatus for suspending the sample
container in water from the center of weighing platform or pan of the balance.

3.1.2. Bucket approximately 8 in (200 mm) in diameter and 8 in (200 mm) in height.

3.1.3. Container with overflow for immersing the bucket in water.

3.1.4. Drying oven capable of maintaining a uniform temperature of 230 ± 9°F (110 ± 5°C).

3.1.5. Drying pans.

3.1.6. Absorbent cloth.

3.1.7. Standard No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve meeting the requirements of ASTM E11.


Page 2 / 8 5.9.0 6 2022
Revised 03 / 2024

3.2. Test Method

3.2.1. Sample Preparation: This test is normally conducted on the portion of the aggregate that passes the 2
in (50 mm) sieve and is retained on the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. If the test is conducted on larger size
particles, it shall be so noted on the test report.

3.2.1.1. Select a portion of the aggregate by splitting or quartering as specified in KT- 0 1, Section 4. The
minimum mass of the sample, all of which passes the 2 in (50 mm) sieve and is retained on the No. 4 (4.
mm) sieve, shall be as set out in the following Table 1 :

```
Table 1
Minimum Sample Size for Coarse Aggregate
```
```
Sieve Size Minimum Mass of Samples (g)
1 1/2 in (37.5 mm) or more 5,
1 in (25.0 mm) 4,
3/4 in (19.0 mm) 3,
1/2 in (12.5 mm) or less 2,
```
NOTE: To select the sample size, use the largest sieve on which 5% or more of the material is specified to
be retained.

3.2.1.2. Thoroughly wash^1 the sample over the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve to remove dust and other adherent
coatings.

3.2.1.3. Dry the sample to a constant mass in the oven at a constant temperature of 230 ± 9°F (110 ± 5°C).

NOTE: If the absorption and specific gravity values will be used as a basis for the design of concrete mixes
where aggregates are used in a moist condition, this drying procedure may be eliminated. For an aggregate
that has been in contact with water and that has free moisture on the particle surfaces, the percentage of free
moisture can be determined by deducting the absorption from the total moisture content determined by KT-
11 Section 5.1. Free moisture can also be calculated as described in KT-24 Section 6.

3.2.2. Procedure

3.2.2.1. Immerse the sample in water^2 and stir vigorously. Soak for a period of 24 ± 4 hours.

3.2.2.2. Remove the sample from the water and bring to a saturated surface-dry condition by rolling the
sample in a dampened, absorbent cloth. (For the purpose of this test, a saturated surface-dry condition of
the aggregate has been reached when the particle surface appears to be moist but not shiny.)

3.2.2.3. Weigh the sample immediately after obtaining the saturated surface-dry condition. Record this
value as “B”. All masses determined in this test shall be to the nearest 1 g or 0.1% of the sample mass,
whichever is greater.

(^1) AASHTO T 85 requires dry sieving and then thoroughly wash to remove dust or other coatings from the surface.
(^2) AASHTO T 85 requires the sample to be dried to constant mass prior to immersing in water for a period of 15 to
19 hours.


Page 3 / 8 5.9.0 6 2022
Revised 03 / 2024

3.2.2.4. Immediately after obtaining the saturated surface-dry mass, immerse the sample in water, stir to
remove any entrapped air and weigh. Record this value as “C”. The water temperature shall be 77 ± 2°F
(25 ± 1°C)^3.

3.2.2.5. Dry the sample to a constant mass at a temperature of 230 ± 9°F (110 ± 5°C).

3.2.2.6. Cool the sample at room temperature, until aggregate has cooled to a temperature that is
comfortable to handle and determine the mass. Record this value as “A”.

3.3. Calculations

Where: A= Mass of oven-dry sample in air, g
B= Mass of surface-dry sample in air, g
C= Mass of saturated sample in water, g

3.3.1. Bulk Specific Gravity:

```
A
```
B−C

3.3.2. Bulk Specific Gravity Saturated Surface-Dry Basis:

```
B
```
B−C

3.3.3. Apparent Specific Gravity:

```
A
```
A−C

3.3.4. Absorption (%):

100 (B−A)

```
A
```
4. PROCEDURE II: FINE AGGREGATE

4.1. Apparatus

4.1.1. The balance shall conform to the requirements of Part V, 5.9; Sampling and Test Methods
Foreword, Class G2.

4.1.2. Volumetric flask of known mass having a minimum capacity of 500mL and calibrated by the
manufacturer to within:

- 0.20mL at 68°F (20°C) for a 500mL flask.
- 0.30mL at 68°F (20°C) for a 1000mL flask.

(^3) AASHTO T 85 requires the water temperature to be 23 ± 1.7°C (73.4 ± 3°F). Changing the temperature to 25 ±
1°C (77 ± 2°F) establishes a uniform temperature requirement on all water bath test-related procedures.


Page 4 / 8 5.9.0 6 2022
Revised 03 / 2024

4.1.3. Not less than two drying pans with a bottom surface of the pan that will have no effect on the material
and results but should allow for the presence of free moisture to be observed. A worn oxidized surface has
been known to work well in showing the presence of free moisture. Other surfaces such as a worn aluminum
pan or galvanized pan may also work. The pan should be flat, dry, clean and have a dull, non-absorbent
surface.

4.1.4. Drying oven capable of maintaining a uniform temperature of 230 ± 9°F (110 ± 5°C).

4.1.5. Water bath having a capacity of at least 2 gal (8 L) maintained at a temperature of 77 ± 2°F (25 ± 1°C)
and a depth approximately equal to or above the height of the bowl of the volumetric flask.

4.1.6. Standard No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve meeting requirements of ASTM E11.

4.1.7. Standard No.100 (150 μm) sieve meeting requirements of ASTM E11.

4.2. Test Method

4.2.1. Sample Preparation: This test is conducted on that portion of aggregate passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm)
and retained on the No.100 (150 μm) sieve.

4.2.1.1. Select a portion of the aggregate by splitting or quartering as established in KT- 01 , Section 4. The
portion selected should be of sufficient size to yield a sample weighing approximately 1,000 g all of which
passes the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve and retained on the No. 100 (150 μm) sieve.

4.2.1.2. Screen the portion selected over the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve and discard all material retained on that
sieve.

4.2.1.3. Wash the minus No. 4 (4.75 mm) material [material passing the No. 4 (4.75mm) sieve] over the
No. 100 (150 μm) sieve to remove dust.

4.2.1.4. Dry the plus No. 100 (150 μm) material [material retained on the No. 100 (150 μm) sieve] to a
constant mass in the oven.

NOTE: If the absorption and specific gravity values will be used as a basis for the design of concrete mixes
where aggregates are used in a moist condition, this drying procedure may be eliminated. For an aggregate
that has been in contact with water and that has free moisture on the particle surfaces, the percentage of free
moisture can be determined by deducting the absorption from the total moisture content determined by KT-
11 Section 5.1. Free moisture can also be calculated as described in KT-24 Section 6.

4.2.2. Procedure

4.2.2.1. Immerse the sample in water and stir vigorously. Soak for a period of 24 ± 4 hours.

4.2.2.2. Remove the sample from the water and bring it to a saturated surface-dry condition^4. The procedure
to be used to obtain the surface-dry condition is as follows:

4.2.2.2.1. Place the saturated sample in a drying pan and allow to dry in air for a short time. Stir the sample
regularly to ensure uniform drying.

(^4) AASHTO T 84 Section 7 .2.1 uses the cone test for determining SSD condition. Under NOTE 4 (2) Provisional
Surface Test, the use of alternative surfaces are permitted and represents the method presented in Section 4.2.2.


Page 5 / 8 5.9.0 6 2022
Revised 03 / 2024

4.2.2.2.2. Transfer the sample to another drying pan. The surface of the pan may be of any surface that will
have no effect on the material and results but should allow for the presence of free moisture to be observed.

4.2.2.2.3. Stir the sample and check for the presence of free moisture as indicated by a presence of moisture
on the bottom surface of the pan. This can typically be seen by a change in color or the presence of a sheen
of moisture on the surface of the pan.

NOTE: The first check should be conducted when there is some free moisture on the surface of the
aggregate particles to ensure that a saturated surface-dry condition has not been passed. If no moisture is
present, it is likely the SSD condition is passed, and the test must be restarted.

4.2.2.2.4. Stir the sample regularly and transfer it frequently from pan to pan until a saturated surface-dry
condition is reached as indicated by the absence of free moisture on the bottom of the pan.

4.2.2.2.5. Determine the mass of the empty flask. Record the value as “F”.

4.2.2.3. Immediately split out and weigh a sample of the saturated surface-dry material weighing not less
than 500 g. Record this value as “B”. Place the sample in the flask.

4.2.2.4. Fill the flask to a level slightly below the calibration mark with water at a temperature of 77 ± 2°F
(25 ± 1°C).

4.2.2.5. Rotate the flask in an inclined position to eliminate all air bubbles. Do not shake. Allow the flask
to sit for several minutes then roll flask again. Continue the process until there are no visible air bubbles
present.

NOTE: Bubbles or foam may be dispelled by touching them carefully with a hot wire or the tip of a paper
towel.

4.2.2.6. Place the flask in the water bath until the temperature of the material inside the flask is the same as
that of the water bath.

4.2.2.7. Fill the flask to the calibrated mark, remove from the water bath and wipe all moisture from the
outside surface.

4.2.2.8. Weigh the flask and its contents to the nearest 0.1 g. Record the value as “K”.

4.2.2.9. Remove the aggregate from the flask and dry to a constant mass in the oven at a temperature of 230
± 9°F (110 ± 5 °C).

4.2.2.10. Cool the sample to room temperature and weigh. Record the value as “A”.

4.3. Flask Verification – Perform minimum every 12 months - Determine the mass of flask filled to the
calibration line with water at 77°F (25°C) and subtract the mass of the flask to determine the mass of water
the flask will hold. Record this value as “C”. This step need not be performed for every test but must be
done a minimum of once every 12 months.

4. 4. Calculations
4. 4 .1. W=K−(F+B)


Page 6 / 8 5.9.0 6 2022
Revised 03 / 2024

4. 4 .2. Bulk Specific Gravity:

```
A
```
C−W

4. 4 .3. Bulk Specific Gravity (Saturated Surface-Dry Basis):

```
B
```
C−W

4. 4 .4. Apparent Specific Gravity:

```
A
```
(C−W)−(B−A)

4. 4 .5. Absorption (%):

100 (B−A)

```
A
```
Where: W= Mass of water added to the flask, g
F= Mass of empty flask, g
K= Mass of flask, plus sample, plus water (See step in Section 4.2.2.8 above), g
A= Mass of oven-dry sample in air, g
B= Mass of saturated surface-dry sample in air, g
C= Mass of water the flask will hold filled to the calibration line at 77°F (25°C)

5. REPORT

5.1. Record the specific gravities to the nearest 0.001. Record the absorption to the nearest 0.01%. Report
all specific gravities to the nearest 0.001 and indicate the type of specific gravity. Report the absorption
result to the nearest 0.1%.

6. PRECISION

6.1. The estimates of precision of this test method (listed in Table 2) are based on results from the
AASHTO Materials Reference Sample Program with testing conducted by AASHTO, T 84 and T 85,
and ASTM, C128 and C670. The significant difference between the methods is that ASTM requires a
saturation period of 24 ± 4 hours, and AASHTO requires a saturation period of 15 to 19 hours. This
difference has been found to have an insignificant effect on the precision indices.


Page 7 / 8 5.9.0 6 2022
Revised 03 / 2024

```
Table 2
Precision for Specific Gravities
and Absorption of Aggregates
Coarse Aggregate Fine Aggregate
Single
Operator
Precision
```
## 1S D2S

```
Single
Operator
Precision
```
## 1S D2S

(^)
Bulk Specific
Gravity (Dry)
0.009 0.025 Bulk Specific
Gravity (Dry)

## 0.011 0.

```
Bulk Specific
Gravity (SSD)
```
```
0.007 0.020 Bulk Specific
Gravity (SSD)
```
## 0.0095 0.

```
App. Specific
Gravity
```
```
0.007 0.020 App. Specific
Gravity
```
## 0.0095 0.

```
Absorption
percent
```
```
0.088 0. 25 Absorption
percent
```
## 0.11 0.

```
Multilaboratory
Precision 1S^ D2S^
```
```
Multilaboratory
Precision 1S^ D2S^
```
```
Bulk Specific
Gravity (Dry)
```
```
0.013 0.038 Bulk Specific
Gravity (Dry)
```
## 0.023 0.

```
Bulk Specific
Gravity (SSD)
```
```
0.011 0.032 Bulk Specific
Gravity (SSD)
```
## 0.020 0.

```
App. Specific
Gravity
```
```
0.011 0.032 App. Specific
Gravity
```
## 0.020 0.

```
Absorption
percent
```
```
0.145 0.41 Absorption
percent
```
## 0.23 0.


Page 8 / 8 5.9.0 6 2022
Revised 03 / 2024

## 7. ADDENDUM – SUPPLEMENTAL CALCULATION TO COMBINE AGGREGATE

## ABSORPTION

7.1. In a few special cases the specifications have an absorption requirement on each individual source.
Procedures I and II are both used and the combined aggregate absorption must be calculated. (This
calculation is not to be used when the specifications have an absorption requirement by Procedure I and/or
Procedure II.

7.2. Absorption of the individual source equals:

Combined Absorption, Aco(%):

(AbSc)(%C)+(AbSf)(%I)

```
100
```
Where: Aco= Combined Absorption, %
AbSc= Absorption, Proc. I, %
AbSf= Absorption, Proc. II, %
%C= Percent plus No. 4 (4.75 mm) in each individual source
%I= Percent minus No. 4 (4.75 mm) in each individual source


